The ICU data set in this directory is provided for use in 1994 AI in Medicine
symposium submissions.  Permission is granted to use the data set for other
research purposes as long as appropriate credit is given as to the source
(AIM-94 data set provided by Isaac Kohane, MD, PhD, The Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA).


Index:
------

* Domain-Description: This file describes the basic physiology and patho-
physiology of ARDS and ventilator management.  In addition, it annotates
the data provided in the data files.

* Patient-Description: clinical details about the patient.

* Monitor-Data-Codes: description of numeric codes for the data presented
in the Monitor-Data file.

* Monitor-Data: 120K data file extracted from bedside monitors, covering
a 12-hr. period of ICU treatment.

* Flowsheet-Data: additional treatment information extracted from paper
flowsheets (annotated in the Domain-Description file).

* Lab-Data: laboratory results received from the lab computer (annotated
in the Domain-Description file).


Methods:
--------

You do not need to use all the data in order to participate in AIM-94.  
Use any subset of the available data from either the ICU data set or the 
diabetes data set.  Furthermore, do not feel constrained if your methods 
cannot be applied directly to these data sets.  We will consider submissions
on related (i.e., clinical data interpretation) topics.  If in doubt,
consult with us via e-mail at <aim-94@camis.stanford.edu>.


The 'Matchmaker' Service:
-------------------------

We realize that an accurate interpretation of clinical data requires 
a thorough understanding of the physiological principles and clinical 
issues involved.  We also realize that many AIM researchers do not 
have convenient access to medical expertise, and that a symposium 
focusing on a clinical theme may catch several parties at a disadvantage.  
Conversely, some clinical researchers may be interested in participating 
but may not have collaborators on the computer science end of the field.  
To offset such disadvantages, we will provide a simple 'Matchmaker' 
service for AIM-94.  The purpose of this service is to establish a medium 
by which researchers can seek collaborators of complementary background 
and interests for AIM-94 participation and beyond.

If you are interested in participating in this program, send a
one-paragraph description of your background, research interests, and the
type of collaboration you are pursuing to <aim-94@camis.stanford.edu> by
September 20th.  We will collate these entries and distribute the whole
list to all participants of the program.  It will be the participants' 
responsibility to contact others to discuss and establish collaborative 
efforts; AIM-94 organizers will solely act as mediators.

